MS-DOS and the IBM-PC

IBM's PC-DOS was the first operating system to implement Real-address mode on the IBM Personal
Computer, using the Intel 8088 processor. Later, it evolved into Microsoft MS-DOS.
Because of this history, it makes sense to use MS-DOS as the environment for explaining all
about Real-mode programming. Real-address mode is frequently called 16-bit mode because
addresses are constructed from 16-bit values.

In this chapter, you will learn the basic memory organization of MS-DOS, how to activate
MS-DOS function calls (called interrupts), and how to perform basic input-output operations at
the operating system level. All of the programs in this chapter run in Real-address mode because
they use the INT instruction. Interrupts were originally designed to run under MS-DOS in Real-address
mode. It is possible to call interrupts in Protected mode, but the techniques for doing so
are beyond the scope of this book.

Real-address mode programs have the following characteristics:
 They can only address 1 megabyte of memory.
 Only one program can run at once (single tasking) in a single session.
 No memory boundary protection is possible, so any application program can overwrite
memory used by the operating system.
 Offsets are 16 bits

When it first appeared, the IBM PC had a strong appeal because it was affordable, and it
ran Lotus 1-2-3, the electronic spreadsheet program that was instrumental in the PC's adoption
by businesses. Computer hobbyists loved the PC because it was an ideal tool for learning how
computers work. It should be noted that Digital Research CP/M, the most popular 8-bit operating
system before PC-DOS, was only capable of addressing 64K of RAM. From this point of
view, PC-DOS's 640K seemed like a gift from heaven.

Because of the obvious memory and speed limitations of the early Intel microprocessors,
the IBM-PC was a single-user computer. There was no built-in protection against memory corruption
by application programs. In contrast, the mincomputer systems available at the time
could handle multiple users, and prevented application programs from overwriting each other's
data. Over time, more robust operating systems for the PC have become available, making it a
viable alternative to minicomputer systems, particularly when PCs are networked together.